Create 2024-07-12-a-closer-look-at-via-ir.md (#105)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2024-07-11-a-closer-look-at-via-ir.md

---
title: 'A Closer Look at Via-IR'

> date: '2024-07-11'

Reviewer: A reminder that the filename and this date will have to be changed before publishing to reflect the date when it actually goes live (I would assume).

Author: Done.

![compilation-pipelines](/img/2024/compilation-pipelines.png)

In this blog post, we will be taking a closer look at the details of via-IR, understand each of the above compilation steps better, and discuss the plans for making via-IR default.

## A quick refresher

Let’s first break down what via-IR stands for.

**Via:** through or by means of
**IR:** Intermediate Representation (Yul or Inline assembly in Solidity)

It is a new compilation pipeline in Solidity that introduces an intermediate step by first translating the Solidity code into an intermediate representation (Yul) instead of directly compiling Solidity code into EVM bytecode.
This intermediate code can then be further optimized before being converted into final EVM bytecode.

The IR-based pipeline was introduced with the aim to not only allow code generation to be more transparent and auditable but also to enable more powerful optimization passes that span across functions and complex control flows.

## Motivation & characteristics

Before we dive into how via-IR works, it may be useful to understand the motivation behind developing Yul and the resultant IR pipeline.

> As briefly introduced above, the goal of an intermediate representation language is to generate code that lies somewhere between the source code and the target machine code. This code is supposed to be more conducive for further processing and optimisations before it is finally ready for bytecode generation from assembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As briefly introduced above, the goal of an intermediate representation language is to generate code that lies somewhere between the source code and the target machine code. This code is supposed to be more conducive for further processing and optimisations before it is finally ready for bytecode generation to assembly.
```

Author: @nikola-matic the bytecode is generated `from` assembly code and not `to` though?

Reviewer: Ugh, you're right, I for some reason read that as Yul.

> The concept of an intermediate representation is rather common in various language compilers such as Java bytecode for Java and LLCM IR for Clang (a compiler for C++). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept of an intermediate representation is rather common in various language compilers such as Java bytecode for Java and LLVM IR for Clang (a compiler for C++). 
```

3. The Yul optimizer will repeatedly perform optimizations on the Yul code.
4. The optimized Yul code is then transformed into EVM assembly using Yul→evmasm code transform.
5. This code is very close to the actual bytecode, but is still suitable for further optimizations by the evmasm optimizer. Hence, the default optimizer is run as in the legacy pipeline steps until the code is sufficiently optimized.
6. Finally, the EVM bytecode is generated as in the legacy pipeline.

### Challenges and considerations

While there are a lot of advantages to choosing an IR, it does not come without its own set of problems. One of the main challenges of via-IR are longer compilation times as a result of the extra optimization steps that are run on the Yul code.

Additionally, the via-IR code generation unconditionally generates code for every expression without codegen shortcuts.
Although, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this.

> The Yul optimizer can be enabled using ``--via-ir --optimize`` on the command line and ``viaIR: true, optimize: {enabled: true}`` using the standard JSON input/output interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Yul optimizer can be enabled using ``--via-ir --optimize`` on the command line and ``viaIR: true, optimize: {enabled: true}`` using the standard JSON interface.
```

> Apart from this, there are also some important semantic changes. You can read more about these changes in [official Solidity docs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.26/ir-breaking-changes.html#semantic-only-changes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apart from this, there are also some important semantic changes. You can read more about these changes in [official Solidity docs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/ir-breaking-changes.html#semantic-only-changes).
```
This one isn't really a biggie.

It also generates better gas-optimized code than the default pipeline. Further optimizations are possible after stabilizing the performance. This can make the resultant EVM code more gas-efficient in the longer term.

In order to make via-IR the default, we are dedicated to reducing the compilation time while keeping the optimization quality high, i.e., achieving low gas costs, and removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors by making the transformation from Yul to EVM code more efficient.

The original plan was to make via-IR the default pipeline in June 2024.
However, we believe that it makes most sense to tie the via-IR-default update to the EOF upgrade for two main reasons:
1. The unlimited swaps and dups in EOF make the Yul to EVM transformation significantly simpler and more efficient. This will help us in removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors.
2. Since both the via-IR and the EOF upgrade involve minor semantic changes, the update will require it to be a breaking change. Combining the release of both features will help us reduce the effort and upgrade burden for Solidity developers.

## What’s next?

> The long-term aim for the via-IR pipeline is to allow moving from a less flexible underlying model to a standard library in the next iteration of Solidity and make the new compilation pipeline including the optimiser as future-proof and efficient as possible. This would enable the compiler to graciously encompass the rapid changes in the language requirements and EVM architecture.

Reviewer: Not sure what via-IR has to do with the standard library introduction; that concept is dependent on the type system changes that the language research group is currently working on?

Author: Daniel wrote this out in the draft initially.

---
title: 'A Closer Look at Via-IR'
date: '2024-07-11'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

The Solidity compiler generates EVM bytecode either directly from Solidity or through the intermediate representation (IR) Yul.
The former is the current default pipeline for compiling Solidity smart contracts and the latter is called the via-IR pipeline.

On a high level, the compilation steps of the two pipelines look like the following:

![compilation-pipelines](/img/2024/compilation-pipelines.png)

In this blog post, we will be taking a closer look at the details of via-IR, understand each of the above compilation steps better and discuss the plans for making via-IR default.

## A quick refresher

Let’s first break down what via-IR stands for.

**Via:** through or by means of
**IR:** Intermediate Representation (Yul or Inline assembly in Solidity)

It is a new compilation pipeline in Solidity that introduces an intermediate step by first translating the Solidity code into an intermediate representation (Yul) instead of directly compiling Solidity code into EVM bytecode.
This intermediate code can then be further optimized before being converted into final EVM bytecode.

> The IR-based code generator was introduced with the aim to not only allow code generation to be more transparent and auditable but also to enable more powerful optimization passes that span across functions and/or complex control flows.

Reviewer 2: Instead of 'and/or' I would just use 'and' here.

## Motivation & characteristics

Before we dive into how via-IR works, it may be useful to understand the motivation behind developing Yul and the resultant IR pipeline.

> As briefly introduced above, the goal of an intermediate representation language is to generate code that lies somewhere between the source code and the target machine code, i.e.

Reviewer 2: I would remove that 'i.e. EVM assembly in the case of Solidity' part

EVM assembly in the case of Solidity. This code is supposed to be more conducive for further processing and optimisations before it is finally ready for bytecode generation from assembly.

> The concept of an intermediate representation is rather common in various language compilers such as Java bytecode for Java and LLVM IR for C++. 

Reviewer 2: maybe LLVM based languages.. because g++ for example (a C++ compiler) is not using LLVM IR. I think it's better to use compiler names here instead of languages. E.g. 'LLCM IR for clang (a C++ compiler)'.

Yul (previously also called JULIA or IULIA) is an intermediate language that was developed as an IR for various backends.
The compiler uses Yul as an intermediate language in the via-IR code generator.

Yul was designed with the following goals in mind:
* To enable simpler and more regular code generation for Solidity

> * To maintain the readability of code produced by the IR code generator

Author: this is straight from the docs so I think it should be fine to stick to the language :)

> * To enable more efficient manual inspection, formal verification and optimization of the code.

Reviewer 2: I guess its meant like that the manual inspection is more efficient, because the code is readable

> * To enable more efficient manual inspection, formal verification and optimization of the code.

Author: IIRC, Daniel left this point in the draft as a suggestion.

> * To make Yul→EVM transform as straightforward as possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* To make the Yul to EVM transformation as straightforward as possible.
```

Author: Is this distinction needed? Is it not our goal to simplify Yul->evmasm transform itself and make adjustments to it so that we can cover remaining cases of stack-to-deep errors?

Reviewer 3: I was just suggesting using `to` instead of `->` and `transformation` (substantive) instead of `transform` (verb). It doesn't change anything about the stack too deep errors.

Author: Ahh, my bad. I was under the impression that Yul->evm transform is indeed what we call the transformation function or something.

> * To be suitable for whole-program and high-level optimizations for various target platforms

Reviewer 2: I think 'for various target platforms' could be removed here

> * To serve as a backend for various languages other than Solidity, for instance, [Fe](https://fe-lang.org/).

Reviewer 2: I guess its just meant that Fe's backend is generating yul code.. however, maybe its better to say "backend for various compilers"

> To conclude, the core motivation of designing an IR for the Solidity compiler, a codegen, and a compilation pipeline is to generate a more optimized bytecode and reduce gas costs as well as enable better security audits.

Reviewer 2: I would remove 'a codegen, and a compilation pipeline'

> To conclude, the core motivation of designing an IR for the Solidity compiler, a codegen, and a compilation pipeline is to generate a more optimized bytecode and reduce gas costs as well as enable better security audits.

Author: I think better security audits are enabled by certain design motivations and goals such as making it more readable, etc. So need not be mentioned under a goal imo.

> Let’s look at the current characteristics of both Yul as an IR and the new via-IR pipeline.
> Below are a few important ones:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let’s look at some important characteristics of both Yul as an IR and the new via-IR pipeline:
```

* Yul performs optimizations across arbitrary control flows and not only optimizations within basic control flow blocks such as branches and loops. In certain cases, Yul can also retain knowledge about memory/storage over complex control flows.

> * Yul provides more opportunities for inlining. Inlining is a method that allows to improve the runtime performance of a compiled language by eliminating the function call overhead by replacing the function call by the machine code that represents the source code in the function definition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Yul provides more opportunities for inlining. This method allows to improve the runtime performance of a compiled language by replacing the function call with the machine code of the function itself, thus eliminating the function call overhead.
```

> * Yul is an IR that targets multiple backends, initially EVM and EWASM. Today it additionally serves as the IR for the legacy EVM and [Ethereum Object Format (EOF)](https://evmobjectformat.org/) upgrade.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Yul is an IR that targets multiple backends, initially EVM and EWASM. Currently, it additionally serves as the IR for the legacy EVM and [Ethereum Object Format (EOF)](https://evmobjectformat.org/) upgrade.
```

> * The ease of complex adjustments for various layer 2 extensions makes the via-IR code generator more flexible.

Author: Only Daniel can clarify this for us ;)

* And last but not least, as mentioned in the design motivations, Yul is designed to be human-readable. Both unoptimized and optimized Yul output can be considered a lower-level target for better auditing and verification.

## Deep dive into via-IR

### Legacy Compilation

> It helps to understand how the default compilation works without via-IR.

Reviewer 2: Maybe '[..] default compilation (legacy pipeline) works [..]' to make it even more clear. I would also say that it's clear that his is without via-IR, because its the legacy pipeline.

The default compilation pipeline for Solidity source code currently consists of the following steps:

> 1. The Solidity compiler takes the Solidity smart contract source code as input and parses the source files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The compiler takes each Solidity smart contract source code as input and parses the source files.
```
Because in step `4` we say `for each contract` so I feel this makes everything more consistent.

2. The compiler then analyzes the source code and generates the EVM assembly directly using the legacy codegen.
3. It then runs the optimizer on the code until the code is considered sufficiently optimized.
4. Finally, the compiler generates bytecode for each contract.

### Compilation via IR

> In order to enable the via-IR pipeline for compilation, you can enable it on the command-line using ``--via-ir`` on the command line or with the option ``{"viaIR": true}`` in standard-json.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to enable the via-IR pipeline for compilation, you can turn it on the command-line using ``--via-ir``  or with the option ``{"viaIR": true}`` in standard-json.
```

> In order to enable the via-IR pipeline for compilation, you can enable it on the command-line using ``--via-ir`` on the command line or with the option ``{"viaIR": true}`` in standard-json.

Reviewer 2: hmm.. would it make sense to also describe how this could be done in the different frameworks, e.g. hardhat and foundry.. if I recall correctly the developer survey stated that basically nobody is using solc directly, right?

The compilation via intermediate representation (Yul) happens in the following steps:

> 1. As in the legacy pipeline, the compiler parses the Solidity source files.

Reviewer 2: I would not refer to the legacy pipeline here.

> 2. Instead of compiling Solidity source code directly to EVM assembly, the new IR code generator will first transform the code into Yul code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Instead of compiling Solidity source code directly to EVM assembly, the new IR code generator will first transform the Solidity code into Yul code.
```

> 2. Instead of compiling Solidity source code directly to EVM assembly, the new IR code generator will first transform the code into Yul code.

Reviewer 2: I would just say directly what the via-IR steps are, without repeating what was the case in legacy. The reader will still be able to compare.

> 2. Instead of compiling Solidity source code directly to EVM assembly, the new IR code generator will first transform the code into Yul code.

Author: Is it not the code generator that does that?

> 3. After this intermediary code transform, the Yul optimizer will repeatedly perform optimizations on the Yul code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. The Yul optimizer will repeatedly perform optimizations on the Yul code.
```
I think it is redundant.

> 4. The Yul code is then transformed into EVM assembly using Yul→evmasm code transform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. The Yul code is then transformed into EVM assembly.
```

> 5. This code is very close to the actual bytecode, but is still suitable for further optimizations by the evmasm optimizer. Hence, the default optimizer is run as in the legacy pipeline steps until the code is sufficiently optimized.

Author: I don't think we refer to it as the direct compilation pipeline anywhere, do we?

6. Finally, the EVM bytecode is generated as in the legacy pipeline.

### Challenges and considerations

> One of the main challenges with via-IR remains to be the slower compilation times as a result of the extra optimization steps that are run on the Yul code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While there are a lot of advantages to choosing an IR, it does not come without its own set of problems. One of the main challenges of via-IR are longer compilation times as a result of the extra optimization steps that are run on the Yul code.
```

> Additionally, the via-IR code generation unconditionally generates code for every expression without codegen shortcuts.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this.

> Hence, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files. However, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this.

Reviewer 4: > Hence, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files.

did you mean less error-prone than the direct compilation (current default)?

Reviewer 2: I think its not good to say that the legacy pipeline has errors.

Reviewer 2: I guess its better to just remove that sentence.

Author: This was another one of the points from Daniel's notes that was supposed to be added in. So I would rephrase it rather than completely removing it.

> Hence, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files. However, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hence, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files. However, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this at the expense of computational power.
```

Author: Is this necessary to add?

Reviewer 4: nope!

> Hence, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files. However, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although, it is considered to be less error-prone than the Solidity source files, this also makes the unoptimized IR code more verbose and inefficient. The Yul optimizer which comprises individual, easy-to-verify, and modular steps can be used to compensate for this.
```

> The Yul optimizer can be enabled using ``--via-ir --optimize`` on the command line.

Reviewer 3: I think we should also mention the `viaIR: true, optimize: {enabled: true}` flags for the standard json input/output interface.

Apart from this, there are also some important semantic changes. You can read more about these changes in [official Solidity docs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.26/ir-breaking-changes.html#semantic-only-changes).

## Making via-IR default

> We shared our plan of making the new via-IR pipeline the default compilation pipeline for Solidity at the [Solidity Summit 2023]((https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jX5VJ4wcJXM&list=PLX8x7Zj6VeznJuVkZtRyKwseJdrr4mNsE&index=18)). Making via-IR default would make the current default pipeline the legacy pipeline.

Reviewer 2: "Making via-IR default would make the current default pipeline the legacy pipeline." Not sure what this sentence is saying..

Author: It means that once the via-ir pipeline becomes the default, the current default pipeline will be considered legacy.

> via-IR is thoroughly tested and is considered to be at par in terms of security with the current default compilation pipeline.

Reviewer 2: I think its better to not say "current default compilation pipeline", but just "legacy pipeline"

The IR pipeline is good at running optimizations and eliminating stack too deep errors in most cases.
It also generates better gas-optimized code than the default pipeline. Further optimizations are possible after stabilizing the performance. This can make the resultant EVM code more gas-efficient in the longer term.

> In order to make via-IR the default, we are dedicated to reducing the compilation time while keeping the optimization quality high, i.e., achieving low gas costs, and removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors by making the Yul→EVM code transform more efficient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to make via-IR the default, we are dedicated to reducing the compilation time while keeping the optimization quality high, i.e., achieving low gas costs, and removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors by making the transformation from Yul to EVM code more efficient.
```

The original plan was to make via-IR the default pipeline in June 2024.
However, we believe that it makes most sense to tie the via-IR-default update to the EOF upgrade for two main reasons:

> 1. The unlimited swaps and dups in EOF make the Yul→EVM transform significantly simpler and more efficient. This will help us in removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The unlimited swaps and dups in EOF make the Yul to EVM transformation significantly simpler and more efficient. This will help us in removing additional cases of stack-too-deep errors.
```

> 2. Since both the via-IR and the EOF upgrade involve minor semantic changes: the updates will require it to be a breaking change. Combining the releases will help us reduce the release efforts and upgrade burden by limiting the breaking changes to minor changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Since both the via-IR and the EOF upgrade involve minor semantic changes, the update will require it to be a breaking change. Combining the release of both features will help us reduce the effort and upgrade burden by limiting the breaking changes to minor changes.
```
I am not sure about the logic here in this point. How will the breaking changes turn into minor ones?

> 2. Since both the via-IR and the EOF upgrade involve minor semantic changes: the updates will require it to be a breaking change. Combining the releases will help us reduce the release efforts and upgrade burden by limiting the breaking changes to minor changes.

Reviewer 2: Basically the changes will be the same, we just combine them into a single breaking release.
"Combining the releases will help us reduce the release efforts and upgrade burden by limiting the breaking changes to minor changes." Somehow read strangs.. maybe something like "Combining these features into a single breaking release will reduce the upgrade burden for Solidity developers." or something like this

## What’s next?

> The long-term aim for the via-IR pipeline is to allow moving from a more hardcoded compiler implementation to a standard library in the next iteration of Solidity and make the new compilation pipeline including the optimiser as future-proof and efficient as possible.

Reviewer 3: I think we should come up with a better term than `hardcoded compiler implementation` which reads a bit depreciating.  Maybe we could say something about the problem with the compiler right now is that it is difficult to expand because the underlying model is not flexible enough to graciously encompass the rapid changes in the language requirements and EVM architecture. Is this a good point of view? :)
